---
layout: post
title: "Automated Program Synthesis"
author: "Yizhe Cheng and Bence Weisz"
supervisors: "Azadeh Farzan"
category: "Software Engineering"
permalink: /automated-program-synthesis
year: "2020"

---

1 Introduction
============

Writing a correct computer program can be both difficult and tedious. To simplify the work of software developers, program synthesizers are used to aid with this. Synthesizers are themselves programs that automatically generate programs for developers based on some specifications. Previously, researchers have used syntactic guided methods for synthesizing programs whereby a rough skeleton of the program code---a syntactic template---is provided by a user to aid in finding a correct program. Unfortunately, in many practical cases it is hard for a user to provide a template [1]. We introduce a method for automated program synthesis, where the synthesis algorithm generates a program through an iterative process. For the purpose of this project, the specification consists of a precondition, a postcondition, and a list of program statements. 

2 Background
==========
....

3 Approach
========

### References

1. Allessandro Abate et al. "Counterexample guided inductive synthesis modulo theories", In *Computer Aided Verification*. H. Chockler and G. Weissenbacher, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018. pp.270-288.

2. E. Clarke, O. Grumberg, S. Jha, Y. Lu, H. Veith, "Counterexample-Guided Abstraction Refinement", in *Computer Aided Verification*. E. A. Emerson and A. P. Sistla, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2000. pp.154-169. 

3. Azadeh Farzan and Anthony Vandikas. "Automated Hypersafety Verification", in *Computer Aided Verification*. I. Dillig and S. Tasiran, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019. pp.200-218.

4. M. Heizmann, H. Jochen, P. Andreas., "Termination Analysis by Learning Terminating Programs", in *Computer Aided Verification*, A. Biere and R. Bloem, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014. pp. 797-813.

5. M. Heizmann, J. Hoenicke, and A. Podelski., "Refinement of Trace Abstraction", in *Static Analysis*. J. Palsberg and Z. Su, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009. 2009. pp. 69-85.

6. Moshe Y. Vardi and Pierre Wolper, "Automata-Theoretic Techniques for Modal Logics of Programs", *Journal of Computer and System Sciences*, vol. 32, pp. 183-221, 1986.