---
layout: post
title: "A Logic for Temporal Preferences"
author: "En Hua Hu"
supervisors: ""
category: "Theory of Computation"
permalink: /theory-of-computation/a-logic-for-temporal-preferences
---

Introduction 
============


The intersection of logic and decision theory has seen a revival in the
past 30 years in multiple fields. In computer science, Boutilier [4]
introduced the standard logical framework for qualitative decision
theory. Another influential source is Halpern et.al [8]. In philosophy,
interest in dynamic preference and epistemic logic has also spurred on
the works of Van Benthem \[9\] and Liu \[5\], to cite two authors. Other
fields such as economics and engineering have also contributed.


In this paper, we aim to give a logical formalization of temporal
preferences. We will use Van Benthem’s standard modal preference
model \[9\]. Van Benthem’s model is used to interpret game theoretic
frameworks where the preference relation is indexed for each agent \[9\].
We should mention that Bienvenu \[2\] is an alternative method which has
many advantages. Here, we consider an index over temporal preferences
and an index for temporal location of states. It is necessary because we
wish to distinguish between the following types of statements:


1) *Time preferences*: *“I prefer having apples now rather than later.”*

2) *Temporal preferences*: *“I will prefer having apples rather than
oranges.”*

3) *Combination of 1&2*: *“I will prefer having apples later rather than
now.”*


Namely, if we do not index preferences temporally, statements 1 and 3
are contradictions, although they may both simultaneously be true in
some intuitive scenarios. Similarly, indexing over worlds is necessary
if we wish to express discounting over time and patience effects.

Semantics
=========


#### Model Layout 

Closely related to the model of Van Benthem et. al, our model is a
5-tuple of the form:

$$M= \langle W,T, P,\{\precsim_{t\in T}\},V \rangle$$

Where $W$ is the set of worlds, $T$ the set of temporal locations, $P$
the set of propositions and $V$ the valuation function.
$\{\precsim_{t\in T}\}$ is the set of preferences the agent has at given
temporal locations[^1].


Furthermore, worlds are denoted as $w_i^t\in W$; the subscript denotes
the contents of the world and the superscript denotes its temporal
location. Namely, the worlds $w_i^2$ and $w_i^3$ are the same world at
different times, whereas $w_1^t$ and $w_2^t$ are different worlds at the
same time. Lastly, the set of $\{\precsim_{t\in T}\}$ denotes the
preference relations the agent has at different times. We take this to
be a preorder on the set of worlds.

#### Syntax

Any well formed formula is recursively obtained as follows:

$$p\in P|  \neg \phi |  \phi \land \psi| \diamond_t\phi| U\phi$$


As per standard modal logic, we take the diamond operator to express the
following:

$$M,w_i^t \vDash \diamond_t\phi \iff \exists w_j^{n}, w_j^{n} \succsim_t w_i^{t}
\ and\  M,w_j^n\vDash \phi$$


Namely $\diamond_t\phi$ being true at $w_j^n$ implies that $\phi$ is
true at a world which is weakly preferred at time $t$ to $w_j^n$. We take the $U$ operator to express universality[^2]:

$$U\phi \iff \forall w\in W$$
we have $$M,w\vDash \phi$$


We denote the dual of $U$ and $\diamond_t$ by $E$ and $\Box_t$.

It is immediate that our semantics will have a standard axiomatization
in S4 for which it is complete and sound since the index over worlds and
preferences does not change the proof of soundness and completeness. The
proof method, which involves the fusion of logic of S4 for each
different modality, is entirely standard. Blackburn \[3\] is the
authoritative reference on this topic.

Temporal Decision Making 
========================

In this section we discuss how the rational agent should behave in our
model. Two views are presented, one internal and one external. First we
define the agent’s decision $d$ over $n$ periods as an n-dimensional
vector $[w_{d1}^1,w_{d2}^2,...,w_{dn}^n]$. This represents their choice
over worlds over time. Thus, a *decision rule* is a mapping from a set
of temporal preferences and constraints on possible combinations of
worlds to a decision.

In the temporal framework, there are two intuitive ways of formulating
decision rules. The first is an internal one, using the notion of time
preferences. The second is external and uses temporal preferences. We
will show that under the right circumstances, the decision rules
produced are identical.

#### Internal: Time Preference

If an agent’s decision rule depends on their time preference, it is said
to be time dependent. The intuition is as follows: agents make *present*
decisions based on what they *presently* want in the future and present.
This view is internal, and the agent acts at each stage in an integrated
and internal manner.


We can formulate the decision rule in an inductive manner as follows:

1) When $t=0$, given $\precsim_0$ and some constraint, we choose
$w_{d0}^0$

2) When $t=n, n \geq 1$, given $\precsim_n$ and the updated constraint,
which depends on $w_{dn-1}^{n-1}$, we choose $w_{dn}^n$.

3) So on and so forth.


The details of how a choice depend on the framework of the specified
decision problem. Usually, we transform the preference order to its
respective utility function and maximize it.

#### External: Temporal Preference

An agent making a decision based on their temporal preferences is one
who weighs each preference ordering and decides like a social planner.
This view is external since the decision rule is not part of the
decision process. Therefore, the agent does not decide; rather, the
decision has been made before the first period. We see that the type of
agent that this decision rule models is much more “rational” as temporal
location does not distort decision making. This does not model humans as
well, but is better suited for machines.

Thus, the decision rule in its full generality is analogous to a social
choice function which depends on temporal preferences rather than those
of different individuals. Here we give a specific example:

1) Assign a weight $\beta_t$ to each temporal location.

2) Assign a utility function $u_t$ which reflects each preference
relation $\precsim_t$.

3) Maximize $\sum_{t=0}^T \beta_t u_t(w_{dt}^t)$ given the constraint.

**Further Characterization and Equivalence**

In this section we will show that the two decision rules are identical
in the most general case.
First we need to define more formally the two types of decision rules.


The time preference decision rule is a set of decisions each made at
time $t$ given the preferences of time $t$ and a constraint, which is
given by previous decisions and the original constraint.\
Formally speaking, we can think of each decision at $t$ as a mapping
from the set of preferences and set of possible allocations
(constraints):

$$DR_t: \{\precsim_t\} \times \{w_i\}_t^n \rightarrow d$$


Where $\{w_i\}_t^n$ is a set of vectors from $t$ to $n$ (possible
allocation/constraint) and $d$ is a decision which is itself a vector of
world $t$ to $n$.

Now consider the following:

$$D_t: \{\precsim_t\} \times \{w_i\}_t^n \rightarrow w_i^t$$

Instead of producing a decision, we simply examine one of the worlds of
the decision, namely the one chosen for the current temporal location.

Similarly, let us define for some $w_j^t$ and constraint $\{w_i\}_t^n$,
a mapping to the constraints for the agent in the next period.

$$C_t: w_j^t \times \{w_i\}_t^n \rightarrow \{w_k\}_{t+1}^n$$

We can now define the decision of the time preference as follows:

$$d=[w_1,w_2,w_3...,w_n]$$


$$D_1(\precsim_1,\{w_i\}_1^n)=w_1$$
$$D_2(\precsim_2, C_1(w_1,\{w_i\}_1^n))=w_2$$
$$ \dots $$
$$D_n(\precsim_n, C_{n-1}(w_{n-1},C_{n-2}(w_{n-2},C(...C(w_1,\{w_i\}_1^n))...)= w_n$$

Comparatively, the temporal preference decision rule is much easier to
define:

$$DR: \{\precsim_t\}_t^n \times \{w_i\}_t^n \rightarrow d$$

We see that time preference decision rules are special cases of temporal
preference decision rules. Furthermore, we can show, by construction,
that every temporal preference decision rule has an equivalent time
preference decision rule.

We can derive the results above because we have not imposed additional
properties which would be natural to impose on decision rules. For
instance, we would expect the $D_1,...,D_n$ of time preference decision
rules to have similarity with each other. Alternatively, we might want
the temporal preference decision rule to satisfy some intuitive
properties, such as Pareto-Optimality.

Conclusion 
==========
We maintain that time preferences are distinct from temporal
preferences. Semantically, the difference is intuitively clear. We have
also shown that they overlap in the model only when preferences are time
consistent with some form of uniform change over time. Further, the
result of equivalent decision rules is slightly misleading, since our
decision rules would not capture the full intuition of the time/temporal
preferences as they are without further characterizations.

### References

1.   Arrow, Kenneth J. ”Extended sympathy and the possibility of social choice.” The American Economic Review (1977):  219-225.

2. Bienvenu,  Meghyn,  Christian  Fritz,  and  Sheila  A.  McIlraith.  ”Planning  with  Qualitative Temporal Preferences.” KR 6 (2006):  134-144.

3. Blackburn, P., van Benthem, J.F. and Wolter, F. eds., 2006. Handbook of modal logic (Vol.3). Elsevier.

4. Boutilier,  Craig.  ”Toward  a  logic  for  qualitative  decision  theory.”  In  Proceedings  of  the Fourth International Conference on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’94), pp.75-86. 1994.

5. Liu, Fenrong. Reasoning about preference dynamics. Vol. 354. Springer Science   Business Media, 2011.

6. Gibbard, Allan. ”Manipulation of voting schemes:  a general result.” Econometrica:  journal of the Econometric Society (1973):  587-601.

7. Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. ”Temptation and selfcontrol.” Econometrica 69, no.6 (2001):  1403-1435

8. Fagin, Ronald, Yoram Moses, Moshe Y. Vardi, and Joseph Y. Halpern. Reasoning about knowledge. MIT press, 2003

9. Van Benthem, Johan, Sieuwert Van Otterloo, and Olivier Roy. Preference logic, conditionals and solution concepts in games. ILLC, 2005.

### Notes

[^1]: It is possible to define the set of temporal preferences fully
    with just one preorder, but we need to impose conditions such as
    time consistency and some form of uniform change over time. In this
    case, time preferences and temporal preferences are interdefineable.
    However, the conditions are often not realistic and in general we
    need to fully specify the preferences.

[^2]: The $U$ operator and its dual are particularly useful to reduce
    preferences. Specifically, they translate preferences over worlds to
    preferences over propositions. For instance, the formula
    $U(\phi\rightarrow \Box_t\psi)$ denotes that all $\psi$ worlds are
    preferred to $\phi$ worlds at time $t$
