---
layout: post
title: "Linked Parliamentary Data Text Classification Methods and Syntactic Parsing"
author: "Tim Alberdingk Thijm"
supervisors: ""
category: "Natural Language Processing"
permalink: /natural-language-processing/linked-parliamentary-data
---

Introduction
===

When discussing political issues, we consider each argument as a sum of
ideologies and assumptions captured in carefully-chosen words. These
latent qualities exist as broad frames or ideological perspectives,
communicated using a particular lexical register or by the repetition of
certain phrases to influence an audience. Within parliament, political
parties form along frames, debating particular topics based on their
ideologies. By attempting to classify text according to frames, we
uncover evidence of these implicit political stances. In our research,
we chose immigration as the main topic and compared the effectiveness of
text classification methods in exploring these frames, employing
numerous parameters to magnify our results. The chief parameter under
investigation was the role played by different syntactic units in
forming a topical model of frames.

Topical models are a computational linguistics approach that allow us to
identify these frames. This method treats each document as a mixture of
latent topics, and tries to recover those topics by identifying
covariant terms within the document. In doing so, we can classify unseen
documents into topics based on the new word data, and identify the party
of unseen documents based on word emphasis and choice. We explored three
approaches in depth: Structural Topic Models (STM) \[1\], Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) \[2\] and Multinomial Naïve Bayes
Classification (MNB) \[3\]. In reverse order, Multinomial Naïve Bayes
allowed for a basic classification by tf-idf of the texts; Latent
Dirichlet Allocation classified topics by covariant terms exclusively;
and Structural Topic Models expanded on LDA by considering party and
date metadata during classification.

The corpus used was the Canadian House of Commons debates since the
9$^{th}$ Canadian Parliament (1901-1904), with particular emphasis on the
36$^{th}$ and 39$^{th}$ Canadian Parliaments, for which our metadata
information – debate date, speaker party and recorded debate topic – was
more complete. The corpus was stored in XML, which allowed for easy
integration of metadata with data in-line. Some modifications were
further made to the scope of the data considered. As the Canadian
parliament has historically been fought over by two parties – the
Liberal Party of Canada and the conservative party of the time –
simplification was performed in order to correct for the long historical
presence of the Liberal Party, and hence much larger number of speeches
than any one other party. All conservative parties were relabelled as
“conservative” (see Appendix A for a list) to achieve parity in speeches
with the Liberals. As other parties beyond these two groups
traditionally have not been very successful in Canadian parliament, we
did not consider them during classification.

Approach
===

The general approach across classification methods was as follows:
extract a filtered subset of the Canadian parliamentary debates from an
XML corpus; preprocess this subset to exclude all non-immigration
debates and any irrelevant data (explained hereafter); and perform
classification on the remaining data. These metadata elements allowed us
to examine how political parties differed in terms of language use. The
preprocessing phase began with the removal of all speeches which did not
fall under the topic of immigration, refugees or asylum seekers, before
proceeding in the removal of stop words and common parliamentary words
and abbreviations – such as “hon”, “member” and “party” – removal of
numbers and punctuation, stemming and removal of very rare or very
frequent words. In all cases, the extracted data was represented as a
“bag of words” with word frequency calculated among the remaining
subset.

In terms of what was particular to each classification, STM was
performed on all available parliaments, and hence words which occurred
in 57% or more of the documents were removed, while words which occurred
fewer than 50 times – 20 when considering only nouns – were also
removed. These thresholds removed most extraneous content, although some
general parliamentary language remained. LDA focussed on the 36$^{th}$ and
39$^{th}$ parliaments, removing the 100 most common words and any words
which occurred five times or less. Lastly, MNB excluded all words
occurring fewer than 5 times and across more than 80% of the documents,
examining – individually – the 33$^{th}$, 36$^{th}$ and 39$^{th}$ parliaments.

Syntactic parsing was performed using two different methods: initially,
the NLTK Stanford POSTagger, and later with Google’s SyntaxNet, using
the English parser Parsey McParseface. For the NLTK parse, XML data was
extracted in Python and the text was tagged with the Stanford parser
before writing out the desired words to a CSV file for classification.
Using SyntaxNet, the XML data was extracted in Python, piped to the
SyntaxNet process and then that output was written back into the XML.
Using this system, part-of-speech and syntactic role information was
determined for each word in the proceedings.

Analysis
===

The LDA and MNB results demonstrated a relatively high rate of success
in distinguishing the political parties by language: LDA results
successfully generated topics in line with the STM ones using a
party-as-document approach. The MNB results, created using an
approximately equal number of liberal and conservative speeches,
reported an average classification result of 80% across all tests and
parliaments.

STM results obtained for the all parts-of-speech model and the
nouns-only model emphasised the difficulties inherent in measuring the
role of syntactic units on frame identification. While similar topics
occurred across the models when dealing with regional immigration issues
such as Japanese-Canadian internment or British Commonwealth
immigration, in many cases linguistically removing non-nouns did not
meaningfully alter the results, likely due to the common roots of nouns
and non-nouns – vote, deportation versus deport, employment versus
employ – which were all typically stemmed.

Conclusion
===

Our analysis demonstrated the effectiveness of classification in
identifying party membership using two categories, a useful result for
identifying frames. Classification performed between 20 and 25% better
than random choice in all cases. Nonetheless, no evidence was found that
a nouns-only corpus provides a meaningful difference in topic results
when compared to an all-parts-of-speech corpus.

Many potential developments exist following this study. Proper
elimination of noise remains an area of improvement, while more tests
need to be undertaken to better understand the role of certain
parts-of-speech in determining topic. LDA and MNB methods can also be
explored further: additional preprocessing can divide political
documents into narrower groups – such as government orders or oral
questions – to better investigate the differences in topic formation. As
well, models can be compared against each other to examine for possible
overfitting. These many future directions to the work emphasise the
continued value in exploring text-as-data and the wide variety of
available text classification methods.

### References

1.  Lucas, Nielsen, Roberts, Stewart, Storer, and Tingley. "Computer
    assisted text analysis for comparative politics." *Political
    Analysis*. 2015.

2.  Phan, Xuan-Hieu, and Cam-Tu Nguyen. "GibbsLDA++: A C/C++
    Implementation of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) Using Gibbs
    Sampling for Parameter Estimation and Inference." *GibbsLDA++*.
    Sourceforge, 2007. Web.

3.  [Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in
    Python](http://jmlr.csail.mit.edu/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html),
    Pedregosa *et al.*, JMLR 12, pp. 2825-2830, 2011.

### Appendix A

Parties labelled as “conservative”:

* Conservative Party of Canada (1867-1942)

* Unionist Party

* Progressive Conservative Party

* Reform Party

* Canadian Alliance

* Conservative Party of Canada
